Department of Electronics Engineering :
Programs
B.Tech
The Department runs a four-year B.Tech. 
M. Tech
Department offers M.Tech. program under four different specializations viz., Microwave Engineering, Digital Techniques & Instrumentation, Communication System Engineering.
Ph.D.
Department also runs the doctoral program under which about 10-20 research scholars are admitted every year. Opportunity is also available for the Ph.D,  



Specializations:
Microelectronics Engineering
The inception of this specialization was closely associated with the Centre for Research in Microelectronics (CRME) established by the Ministry of Human Resource Development
Microwave Engineering
Microwave Engineering specialization was offered to the UG, PG and Ph.D. students since the year of establishment (1971) of the Department.   
Communication System
This research group focusses primarily on PHY and MAC layer issues of wireless networks
Digital Techniques & Instrumentation 
Digital Techniques and Instrumentation (DTI) specialization of the Department was started in the academic year 1974



Historical Background
The Department of Electronics Engineering came into existence as an offshoot of Electrical Engineering Department in the year 1971 with a great effort from Prof. S.S. Banerjee. In the same year the erstwhile Banaras Engineering College (BENCO), College of Mining and Metallurgy and College of Technology were amalgamated to form the Institute of Technology-Banaras Hindu University (IT-BHU). The Department offers Bachelor, Master and Doctoral programs in Electronics Engineering with the major thrust areas of Microelectronics, Microwave Engineering, Digital Techniques & Instrumentations and Communication Systems. The Department has been actively engaged in research since its inception as evidenced by the research publications. The first major financial support from the Department of Electronics (DoE), Govt. of India in the tune of Rs.1.0 Crore was received by the Department in 1980 to carry out research for development of High Power Microwave Tubes. Subsequently, in recognition of excellent research contribution, the University Grants Commission (UGC) identified the Department to provide financial support under Special Assistance Program (SAP) in 1983 for five years. 
