ELECTRONICS DEPARTMENT

Historical Background

The Department of Electronics Engineering came into existence as an offshoot of Electrical Engineering Department in the year 1971 with a great effort from Prof. S.S. Banerjee. In the same year the erstwhile Banaras Engineering College (BENCO), College of Mining and Metallurgy and College of Technology were amalgamated to form the Institute of Technology-Banaras Hindu University (IT-BHU). The Department offers Bachelor, Master and Doctoral programs in Electronics Engineering with the major thrust areas of Microelectronics, Microwave Engineering, Digital Techniques & Instrumentations and Communication Systems. The Department has been actively engaged in research since its inception as evidenced by the research publications. The first major financial support from the Department of Electronics (DoE), Govt. of India in the tune of Rs.1.0 Crore was received by the Department in 1980 to carry out research for development of High Power Microwave Tubes. Subsequently, in recognition of excellent research contribution, the University Grants Commission (UGC) identified the Department to provide financial support under Special Assistance Program (SAP) in 1983 for five years. During this period, the department established three independent research centers e.g., Centre of Research in Microwave Tubes (CRMT), Centre for Research in Microelectronics (CRME) and Centre for Research in Microprocessor Applications (CRMA) supported by UGC/MHRD. The Department was further recognized as a Centre of Advanced Studies (CAS) by the UGC in 1989. The Department successfully completed three phases of CAS in the year 2009. The Department is also one of the DRDO centers for M.Tech. in Electronics Engineering. In addition to this, the Department has been actively pursuing manpower training and collaborative research programs in specialized areas to meet the national manpower requirement in R&D laboratories, academic institutions and industries. The Department has a close interaction with many reputed national R&D laboratories such as DRDO, CSIR, Bharat Electronics Ltd. and leading software companies as well as foreign Universities.
