# Department of Metallurgical Engineering.
The Department is currently offering Bachelor, Master and Doctoral degree programmes. It had been recognized as Centre of Advanced Study in 1980 and presently running into the IVth phase of this status. The National Electron Microscope Facility (NELMIF) was established through the generous grant of DST in 1982. The Department is also a Centre of QIP programme of MHRD/AICTE since 1981. The members of staff have been actively engaged in research and have undertaken many research/cons ultancy projects. These research activities span over wide ranging fields of nanomaterials characterization, quasicrystals, biomaterials, magnetic materials, spray forming, rapid solidification, mechanical alloying, powder metallurgy, modeling of phase diagram by CVM, phase transformation in steels and nonferrous alloys and structure property correlations, Advanced steels, severe plastic deformations, creep and fatigue behaviour of materials, nanoindentation, corrosion, thermodynamics of alloys and semiconducting intermetallics, pyrometallurgy of sulphide minerals, preparation of molycarbides, processing of ferrous and non-ferrous alloys, foundry and welding, wear studies of composites, waste utilization and energy management etc. Our Departmental Library is well endowed with over 13000 books and subscriptions to 33 research journals, 3886 periodicals, besides the e-subscriptions from IT main library and BHU central library.

In the year under review the Department has received a grant of approx Rs. 6.74 crores from Steel Development Fund, Ministry of Steel,Govt. of India. Under the programme, the Department has planned to procure a JMATPRO, ThermocalC with Steel database, Vaccuum Induction Melting Furnace, X-ray Diffractometer with Texture analysis etc. Department has Malaviya Chair to act as nodal Centre for improving Railways Technologies. Department organized International Conference on Electron Microscopy and XXXVII Annual Meeting of the Electron Microscope Society of India (EMSI-2016) was held during June 02-04, 2016. The Conference was Inaugurated by Dr. R. Chidambaram, Principal Scientific Advisor of Govt. of India, New Delhi on 02.06.2016 in the Shehnai Hall of Hotel Ramada. Prof. R.K. Mandal was Chairman, EMSI-2016.

The Advanced Research Centre for Iron and Steel, IITBHU, Varanasi in association with department has conducted a meet between ARCIS and Steel industries on 17/12/2016. Representatives from the Steel industries , SAIL, Tata Steel Limited, Jamshedpur, JSW Steel Limited, Vijayanagar, Visakhapatnam Steel Plant/ Rastrya Ispat Nigam Limited, Kalyani Carpenter Special steels Pvt Ltd, Pune, Tata Consultancy Services Limited, Pune, Mahindra Sanyo Special Steels Pvt Ltd, Khopoli, Maruti Suzuki India Ltd., M. N. Dastur & Company (P) Ltd, Kolkata, Jamipol, Jamshedpur, RSB Metaltech Pvt. Ltd., Bhubaneswar and NAFEMS, India Operations, Mumbai presented and discussed their expectations from the Centre. Dr. V. Ramaswamy chaired the sessions.

The Department of Metallurgical Engineering, IIT (BHU), Varanasi in association with Advanced Research Centre for Iron and Steel of the Institute, has conducted a QIP sponsored short term course and continuing education programme on Steel Technologies on 2-9th March, 2017. Dr. R. Manna, Assoc. Prof. was the Course Coordinator for the Programme. 13 teachers from the Institutions like, NITs, IITs, and other AICTE approved institutions, 8 personnels from organizations like Tata Steel Ltd., Jamshedpur, RDCIS, SAIL, Ranchi, Visa Steel, DMRL, Hyderabad and 7 research scholars of the Institute participated in the programme. Department of Metallurgical Engineering, IIT(BHU) and Indian Institute of Metals, Varanasi Chapter organized Anveshan 2017 during 24th – 26th March, 2017. There were various categories of events such as Paper and Poster presentation contest – Rivista, Industrial defined problem - Initio, online Computational Metallurgy – Codemet, Model presentation – Advent, Capturing the beauty of metallurgy – Snapshot, Internship event (30+ internship opputunities) and quizzing event – Quarks. The event experienced a huge participation of students and teacher with equal enthusiasm. There were more than 100 participants of very reputed institutes from all over the nation like IIT Roorkee, NIT Jalandhar, Jadavpur University, NIT Raipur, GEC Gujarat, NIT Durgapur, OPJIT Raigarh etc. Hindustan Copper Limited and Indian Institute of Metals, Varanasi were the major sponsors.

The Department has a tradition of recognizing eminent personalities from Industry and its alumni for their significant contributions towards the industrial growth, academics as well as research and development activities in the country.
In addition, the Department also recognizes its former staff members who have rendered great services for the growth of the Department. There is also a tradition of recognizing the meritorious performance of the students. These awards are Distinguished Alumnus Award, 3i Award (Industry-Institute-Interaction Award), Distinguished Services Award, Professor N. Prasad Memorial Prizes, Dr. A.B. Chatterjea Memorial Rolling Trophy, TRAERF Merit Scholarship, Certificate of Merit. This year the Distinguished Services Award was given to Prof. G.V.S. Sastry. This Department always strives to maintain its prestigious image in the Institute as well as at national and international level is it in teaching, research, maintaining cordial relations among students & staff and in fostering linkages with small and major industries including national and international educational research institutions.

